PEP: 9998
Title: Wheel Variants: Building
Author: Jonathan Dekhtiar <jonathan@dekhtiar.com>,
        Michał Górny <mgorny@quansight.com>,
        Konstantin Schütze <konstin@mailbox.org>,
        Ralf Gommers <ralf.gommers@gmail.com>,
        Andrey Talman <atalman@meta.com>,
        Charlie Marsh <charlie@astral.sh>,
        Michael Sarahan <msarahan@gmail.com>,
        Eli Uriegas <eliuriegas@meta.com>,
        Barry Warsaw <barry@python.org>,
        Donald Stufft <donald@stufft.io>,
        Andy R. Terrel <andy.terrel@gmail.com>
Discussions-To: Pending
Status: Draft
Type: Standards Track
Topic: Packaging
Requires: 825, 9999
Created: 02-Mar-2026
Post-History: Pending

Abstract
========


Motivation
==========

:pep:`825` and :pep:`9999` introduced variant wheels while focusing on
the file format and installation process. This PEP follows up on that by
defining a consistent data format and behavior for building variant
wheels.


Specification
=============

Definitions
-----------

The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
"SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
document are to be interpreted as described in :rfc:`2119`.


Building variant wheels
-----------------------

Tools MAY support building variant wheels. When building variant wheels,
they MUST ensure that the produced wheels conform to :pep:`825` and
:pep:`9999`. In particular, tools MUST ensure that:

- variant metadata conforms to the schema
- variant label matches the only key in the ``variants`` dictionary
- there are entries in ``default-priorities.namespace`` and
  ``providers`` dictionaries for all namespaces found in variant
  properties
- when ``providers.{namespace}.static-properties`` specifies more than
  one feature name, there are entries for all feature names in
  ``default-priorities.feature.{namespace}``

Additionally, tools MAY verify that:

- all specified variant properties are valid according to the respective
  providers (using `extensions to provider plugin API`_)


Build backend support
---------------------

Build backends MAY support building variant wheels. However, :pep:`517`
and :pep:`660` hooks MUST NOT build variant wheels, unless they are
explicitly requested by the user.

For consistency, it is RECOMMENDED that build backends implement the
following interface for building variant wheels:

- variant metadata seed is stored in ``pyproject.toml`` file, as
  described in `pyproject.toml integration`_
- the available variants are described in ``variant.variants`` table
  in said file
- the ``config_settings`` dictionary of wheel building hooks accepts a
  ``variant-label`` key that enables building the specified variant from
  ``variant.variants`` dictionary
- the ``get_requires_for_build_wheel()`` hook of :pep:`517`,
  ``get_requires_for_build_editable()`` hook of :pep:`660`, and hooks of
  similar purpose include the necessary provider plugin packages for the
  variant being built, and the build backend uses the version installed
  in the build environment as a result


pyproject.toml integration
--------------------------

This specification extends the ``pyproject.toml`` file originally
defined in :pep:`518`. Said file MAY contain a top-level ``variant``
table that contains variant metadata for the project, as defined by
:pep:`9999` or a subsequent specification, with the extensions listed
in this PEP, converted into the respective TOML types. When building
variant wheels, tools SHOULD use the information from this file to seed
the variant metadata in the built variant wheels. More specifically:

- the ``default-priorities`` dictionary is used to seed
  ``default-priorities`` in the wheels
- the ``providers`` dictionary is used to seed ``providers`` in the
  wheels and to query providers at build time, if necessary
- the ``variants`` dictionary MAY be used to provide a mapping from
  variant labels to variant properties, to facilitate requesting a build
  of a specific variant (``null`` variant does not need to be specified)

Tools MAY provide additional methods of providing the necessary variant
metadata.


Extension to provider metadata
''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

The provider information dictionaries used as values in the
``providers`` dictionary MAY contain the following key:

- ``build-requires: list[str]``: A list of one or more
  :ref:`dependency specifiers <dependency-specifiers>`, same as
  ``requires`` but used only to populate ``static-properties`` at build
  time, as explained in `populating static properties from provider
  plugins`_.

If ``build-requires`` is specified, both ``requires`` and
``static-properties`` MUST NOT be present. In the resulting variant
wheel, the ``build-requires`` and ``plugin-api`` keys MUST be removed,
and ``static-properites`` MUST be added instead.


Example
'''''''

The ``pyproject.toml`` file corresponding to the package with variant
metadata equivalent to the one provided in the example in :pep:`9999`
could look like the following:

.. code:: toml

    [variant]
    "$schema" = "https://variants-schema.wheelnext.dev/peps/9999/v0.2.0.json"

    [variant.default-priorities]
    # REQUIRED: specifies that x86_64 CPU properties are more important than
    # aarch64 CPU properties (both are mutually exclusive, so the exact order
    # does not matter), and both are more important than specific BLAS/LAPACK
    # library:
    namespace = ["x86_64", "aarch64", "blas_lapack"]

    # OPTIONAL: makes "library" the most important feature in "blas_lapack"
    # namespace
    feature.blas_lapack = ["library"]

    # OPTIONAL: makes ["mkl", "openblas"] the most important values of
    # "blas_lapack :: library" feature
    property.blas_lapack.library = ["mkl", "openblas"]

    # REQUIRED: variant providers
    # ---------------------------
    # (keys must matchdefault-priorities.namespace)

    [variant.providers.aarch64]
    # Specifies provider plugin package. REQUIRED since there is no
    # "static-properties" -- plugin will be queried at install time.
    requires = [
      "provider-variant-aarch64 >=0.0.1",
    ]
    # Overrides plugin API endpoint. OPTIONAL; without it, the API
    # endpoint "provider_variant_aarch64" would be used.
    plugin-api = "provider_variant_aarch64.plugin:AArch64Plugin"

    [variant.providers.blas_lapack]
    # REQUIRED: used to populate "static-properties".
    build-requires = ["blas-lapack-variant-provider"]

    [variant.providers.x86_64]
    # Specifies provider plugin package. REQUIRED since there is no
    # "static-properties" -- plugin will be queried at install time.
    requires = [
      "provider-variant-x86-64 >=0.0.1; python_version >= '3.12'",
      "legacy-provider-variant-x86-64 >=0.0.1; python_version < '3.12'",
    ]
    # Overrides plugin API endpoint. REQUIRED since "requires" may
    # evaluate to two different packages depending on Python version.
    plugin-api = "provider_variant_x86_64.plugin:X8664Plugin"

    # RECOMMENDED: variants that can be built
    # ---------------------------------------

    # "x8664v3_openblas" label corresponds to:
    # - blas_lapack :: library :: openblas
    # - x86_64 :: level :: v3
    [variant.variants.x8664_v3_openblas]
    blas_lapack.library = ["openblas"]
    x86_64.level = ["v3"]

    # "x8664v4_mkl" label corresponds to:
    # - blas_lapack :: library :: mkl
    # - x86_64 :: level :: v4
    [variant.variants.x8664_v4_mkl]
    blas_lapack.library = ["mkl"]
    x86_64.level = ["v4"]


Extensions to provider plugin API
---------------------------------

Provider plugins MAY be used at build time, if the provider metadata
specifies either ``requires`` or ``build-requires`` key, per the
`extension to provider metadata`_ section.

The plugin interface specified in :pep:`9999` is extended by adding the
following REQUIRED function:

- ``get_all_config() -> list[VariantFeatureConfigType]`` that returns a
  list of variant feature names and their values that are valid
  according to the provider plugin. The ordering of the lists is
  insignificant. A particular plugin version MUST always return the same
  lists (modulo ordering), irrespective of any runtime conditions.

The value returned by ``get_supported_configs()`` MUST be a subset of
the feature names and values returned by ``get_all_configs()`` (modulo
ordering).

Additionally, the following OPTIONAL attribute is added:

- ``all_properties_compatible: bool = False``; if it set to ``True``,
  then all valid feature names and values are always supported. In that
  case, the ``get_supported_configs()`` function MUST always return the
  same value as ``get_all_configs()`` (modulo ordering).


Example implementation
''''''''''''''''''''''

The example plugin implementation from :pep:`9999` can be extended in
the following way:

.. code:: python

    from dataclasses import dataclass


    @dataclass
    class VariantFeatureConfig:
        name: str
        values: list[str]
        multi_value: bool


    # internal -- provided for illustrative purpose
    _MAX_VERSION = 4
    _ALL_GPUS = ["narf", "poit", "zort"]


    def get_supported_configs() -> list[VariantFeatureConfig]:
        ...  # same as in PEP 9999


    def get_all_configs() -> list[VariantFeatureConfig]:
        return [
            VariantFeatureConfig(
                name="min_version",
                # [1, 2, 3, 4] (the order does not matter)
                values=[str(x) for x in range(1, _MAX_VERSION + 1)],
                # single-valued, since there is always one minimum
                multi_value=False,
            ),
            VariantFeatureConfig(
                name="gpu",
                # [narf, poit, zort]
                values=_ALL_GPUS,
                # multi-valued, since a package can target multiple GPUs
                multi_value=True,
            ),
        ]


Example AoT plugin implementation
'''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

.. code:: python

    from dataclasses import dataclass


    @dataclass
    class _VariantFeatureConfig:
        name: str
        values: list[str]
        multi_value: bool


    all_properties_compatible = True


    def get_supported_configs() -> list[_VariantFeatureConfig]:
        return [
            VariantFeatureConfig(
                name="library",
                values=["accelerate", "openblas", "mkl"],
                multi_value=False,
            ),
        ]


    def get_all_configs() -> list[_VariantFeatureConfig]:
        return get_supported_configs()


Populating static properties from provider plugins
--------------------------------------------------

If a variant provider metadata used at build time contains the
``build-requires`` key (as specified in the `extension to provider
metadata`_ section), the specified provider plugin is used to populate
the ``static-properties`` dictionary while building the variant wheel.

The packages to install and the plugin interface to use are determined
as specified in :pep:`9999`, except that:

- the ``build-requires`` key is used in place of ``requires`` key
- all providers are assumed to be enabled and trusted

In particular, the ``plugin-api`` key MAY be specified to override the
plugin API endpoint.

When populating static properties, the tool MUST:

1. Ensure that the loaded plugin has ``all_properties_compatible ==
   True`` attribute. It is invalid to use a plugin without that
   attribute in ``build-requires``.

2. Call ``get_supported_configs()`` to obtain the ordered lists of
   supported feature name and their values.

3. Verify that the properties the wheel is built with are compatible per
   ``get_supported_configs()``. It is invalid to build a variant wheel
   with properties that are not permitted by ``static-properties``.

4. Remove ``build-requires`` and ``plugin-api`` keys from the provider
   metadata.

5. Add ``static-properties`` key to the provider metadata, populating it
   using the lists obtained from ``get_supported_configs()``.

6. If ``get_supported_configs()`` returned more than one feature name,
   ensure that all feature names are present in
   ``default-priorities.feature.{namespace}`` list. Any feature names
   missing should be appended in the same order as returned by
   ``get_supported_configs()``.


Rationale
=========

This PEP considers a variety of possible tools that may emit variant
wheels, including build backends, build frontends and tools dedicated to
converting regular wheels into variant wheels. A standardized interfaces
for project tree metadata and build backends are proposed to offer
consistent user experience, but are by no means mandatory. The standard
``pyproject.toml`` file is used to avoid spreading the project
configuration across multiple files, and the same schema as for variant
metadata is used.

When using build backends, using ``get_requires*()`` hooks for exposing
provider plugin dependencies is recommended, to reuse the existing logic
for creating isolated environments and installing packages. This implies
that provider plugin packages are treated as regular build dependencies.

The provider plugin API is extended to enable verifying whether the
properties specified for a variant are correct. To this purpose, a
``get_all_configs()`` function is introduced that is symmetric to
``get_supported_configs()`` introduced in :pep:`9999`. However, the
build tools are not required to perform this validation, as it requires
installing and querying provider plugins.

Furthermore, this PEP permits populating ``static-properties`` in
provider information using provider plugins. This needs both to be
supported by the plugin in question, and explicitly enabled in the
package, through using ``build-requires`` in place of ``requires``. This
can be used to ensure that multiple packages use the same properties for
the same features, such as BLAS/LAPACK library names. The process is
handled entirely at build time, and the resulting wheel is fully
compliant with :pep:`9999`.

Technically, the presence of both ``get_supported_configs()`` and
``get_all_configs()`` for AoT plugins is redundant: both must return the
same values, except that the latter may return them in any order.
However, the specification requires both to keep a single interface for
all provider plugins.


Backwards Compatibility
=======================

As noted in :pep:`825`, variant wheels are incompatible with the
existing tooling. To avoid disrupting existing workflows, this PEP
requires (in `build backend support`_) that build backends do not build
variant wheels by default.

The introduction of a new ``variant`` table (in `pyproject.toml
integration`_) follows from :pep:`518` specifying that such tables are
"reserved for future use by other PEPs". Nevertheless, it is possible
that overly strict tools will reject such ``pyproject.toml`` files as
unsupported, even if the use of wheel variants is not relevant to their
use.


Security Implications
=====================

There are no new security implications beyond what is already noted in
:pep:`9999`. In particular, the use of provider plugins during build
time is not seen as an additional risk, given that the dependencies are
provider by the user directly (for example, in ``pyproject.toml``) and
they are treated equivalently to other build dependencies.


How to Teach This
=================

This PEP is primarily oriented towards package maintainers. The primary
source of information will be the documentation of build backends and
other tools that support building variant wheels. The documentation
present on ``packaging.python.org`` will also be updated for the
recommended build backend interface.


Reference Implementation
========================

The `variantlib <https://github.com/wheelnext/variantlib>`__ project
provides a reference implementation of low-level library functions for
this PEP. The `pep_817_wheel_variants
<https://github.com/wheelnext/pep_817_wheel_variants>`__ monorepo
includes a demo ports of a few build systems.


Rejected Ideas
==============



Open Issues
===========


Acknowledgements
================

This work would not have been possible without the contributions and
feedback of many people in the Python packaging community. In
particular, we would like to credit the following individuals for their
help in shaping this PEP (in alphabetical order):

Alban Desmaison, Bradley Dice, Chris Gottbrath, Dmitry Rogozhkin,
Emma Smith, Geoffrey Thomas, Henry Schreiner, Jeff Daily, Jeremy Tanner,
Jithun Nair, Keith Kraus, Leo Fang, Mike McCarty, Nikita Shulga,
Paul Ganssle, Philip Hyunsu Cho, Robert Maynard, Vyas Ramasubramani,
and Zanie Blue.


Change History
==============

- xx-yyy-2026

  - Initial version, split from :pep:`817` draft.
  - A specific build backend interface for building variant wheels was
    proposed.
  - The ``variants`` dictionary is now permitted in ``pyproject.toml``
    metadata, and it can be used to define available variants to build.
  - A new ``build-requires`` key was introduced in provider metadata.
    It can only be used ``pyproject.toml`` and it is used to populate
    ``static-properties`` from a provider plugin at build time. It
    replaced the previous combination of ``install-time = false`` with
    non-empty ``requires``.


Appendices
==========

::

    - :ref:`pep9998-variant-json-schema`


Copyright
=========

This document is placed in the public domain or under the
CC0-1.0-Universal license, whichever is more permissive.
